4 Requirements on generating plants
4.1 General: This clause defines the requirements on generating plants to be operated in parallel with the distribution network. Where settings or a range of configurability is provided and respecting the legal framework the configurations and settings may be provided by the DSO. Where no settings are provided by the DSO, the specified default settings shall be used; if no default settings are provided, the producer shall propose settings and inform the DSO. The requirements of Clause 4 apply during normal operation of the generating units and do not apply in case of maintenance or units out of operation. The provisions apply to EESS in generation mode. In charging mode EESS should have the same characteristics, unless stated otherwise in the clauses of this European Standard. The applicability is independent of the duration the generating unit operates in parallel with the distribution network. It is the responsibility of the DSO to relax, if deemed appropriate, the requirements for an individual generating unit or plant whose operation in parallel only lasts for a short time (temporary operation in parallel). The relaxed requirements shall be agreed between the DSO and the producer, along with the maximum allowable duration of the temporary operation in parallel. For the short-term parallel operation an appropriate device shall automatically disconnect the generating unit or plant as soon as the maximum allowable duration has elapsed. If different requirements on the generating plant interfere with each other, the following hierarchy in descending order shall be applied: 1. Generating unit protection, including regarding the prime mover; 2. Interface protection (see 4.9) and protection against faults within the generating plant; 3. Voltage support during faults and voltage steps (see 4.7.4); 4. The lower value of: remote control command on active power limitation for distribution grid security (see 4.11) and local response to overfrequency (see 4.6.1); 5. Local response to underfrequency if applicable (see 4.6.2); 6. Reactive power (see 4.7.2) and active power (P(U) see 4.7.2) controls; 7. Other control commands on active power set point for e.g. market, economic reasons, self-consumption optimization. The system shall be so designed that under foreseeable conditions no self-protection trips prior to the fulfilment of the requirements of this European Standard and all settings provided by the DSO or responsible party. For cogeneration plants embedded in industrial sites, active power requirements shall be agreed between the responsible party and the producer. In such a case the priority list is adapted accordingly. Besides the requirements of Clause 4, additional requirements apply for connecting a generating plant to the distribution network, e.g. assessment of the point of connection. However, this is excluded from the scope of this European Standard but some guidance is provided in the informative Annex A. EN 50549-10 provides technical guidance for tests on generating units and interface protection to evaluate their electrical characteristics. EN 50549-10 shall be applied to evaluate the characteristics of generating units and interface protection used in generating plants relating to the requirements of this Standard. Electrical characteristics may alternatively be evaluated according to standards other than EN 50549-10, if the following prerequisites are fulfilled: - The alternative verification procedure covers all required technical aspects and characteristic quantities stipulated in EN 50549-1 and EN 50549-2, respectively. - The alternative verification procedure shall not be less stringent or technically less demanding than the correspondent verification procedure in EN 50549-10. - The alternative verification procedure leads to results of at least equivalent confidence level as EN 50549-10. - The equivalent or higher confidence level of the alternative verification procedure shall be confirmed by the entity stating compliance based upon these tests. - The entity stating compliance based upon these tests shall have sufficient expertise in both EN 50549-10 and the applied standard. NOTE: This also applies for a partial application of another standard only for specific functions or operational capabilities.
4.2 Connection scheme: The connection scheme of the generating plant shall be in compliance with the requirements of the DSO. Different requirements may be subject to agreement between the producer and the DSO depending on the power system needs. Inter alia, the generating plant shall ensure the following: synchronization, operation and disconnection under normal network operating conditions, i.e. in the absence of faults or malfunctions; faults and malfunctions within the generating plant shall not impair the normal functioning of the distribution network; coordinated operation of the interface switch with the generating unit switch, the main switch and switches in the distribution network, for faults or malfunctions within the generating plant or the DSO network during operation in parallel with the distribution network; and disconnection of the generating plant from the distribution network by tripping the interface switch according to 4.9. In order to satisfy the above functions, coordinated but independent switches and protection equipment may be applied in the generating plant, as shown in the example in Figure 2.
4.3 Choice of switchgear
4.3.1 General: Switches shall be chosen based on the characteristics of the power system in which they are intended to be installed. For this purpose, the short circuit current at the installation point shall be assessed, taking into account, inter alia, the short circuit current contribution of the generating plant.
4.3.2 Interface switch: Switches shall be power relays, contactors or mechanical circuit breakers each having a breaking and making capacity corresponding to the rated current of the generating plant and corresponding to the short circuit contribution of the generating plant. The short-time withstand current of the switching devices shall be coordinated with rated short circuit power at the point of connection. In case of loss of auxiliary supply power to the switchgear, a secure disconnection of the switch is required immediately. Where means of isolation (according to HD 60364-5-551) is not required to be accessible to the DSO at all times, automatic disconnection with single fault tolerance according to 4.13 shall be provided. NOTE 1: For PV-inverters, further requirements are stated in EN 62109–1 and EN 62109–2 with respect to the interface switch. The function of the interface switch might be combined with either the main switch or the generating unit switch in a single switching device. In case of a combination, the single switching device shall be compliant to the requirements of both, the interface switch and the combined main switch or generating unit switch. As a consequence, at least two switches in series shall be present between any generating unit and the POC. NOTE 2: This does not refer to the number of series-connected switches in order to ensure single fault tolerance as required in 4.13 but to the number of different switching devices itself.
4.4 Normal operating range
4.4.1 General: Generating plants when generating power shall have the capability to operate in the operating ranges specified below regardless of the topology and the settings of the interface protection.
4.4.2 Operating frequency range: The generating plant shall be capable of operating continuously when the frequency at the point of connection stays within the range of 49 Hz to 51 Hz. In the frequency range from 47 Hz to 52 Hz the generating plant should be capable of operating until the interface protection trips. Therefore, the generating plant shall at least be capable of operating in the frequency ranges, for the duration and for the minimum requirement as indicated in Table 1. Respecting the legal framework, it is possible that for some synchronous areas more stringent time periods and/or frequency ranges will be required by the DSO and the responsible party. Nevertheless, they are expected to be within the boundaries of the stringent requirement as indicated in Table 1 unless producer, DSO, TSO and responsible party agree on wider frequency ranges and longer durations. NOTE 1: For small isolated distribution networks (typically on islands) even more stringent time periods and frequency ranges may be required. As long as generating modules with linear Sterling engines are recognized as emerging technology according to COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2016/631 Title 6, they are permitted to disconnect below 49,5 Hz and above 50,5 Hz. This permission does not affect the requirements for interface protection according to clause 4.9. In this case over and under frequency machine protection might trip prior to interface protection. If an integrated interface protection device is used, the reduction of the configuration range of the interface protection in clause 4.9 is acceptable. NOTE 2: The status of emerging technology in COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2016/631 Title 6 depends on the cumulative maximum capacity of this technology. Once the threshold in cumulative maximum capacity is reached the status will be withdrawn.
Table 1 - Minimum time periods for operation in underfrequency and overfrequency situations
| Frequency Range | Time period for operation Minimum requirement | Time period for operation stringent requirement |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 47,0 Hz – 47,5 Hz | not required | 20 s |
| 47,5 Hz – 48,5 Hz | 30 min a | 90 min |
| 48,5 Hz – 49,0 Hz | 30 min a | 90 min a |
| 49,0 Hz – 51,0 Hz | Unlimited | Unlimited |
| 51,0 Hz – 51,5 Hz | 30 min a | 90 min |
| 51,5 Hz – 52,0 Hz | not required | 15 min |
Respecting the legal framework, it is possible that longer time periods are required by the responsible party in some synchronous areas.
4.4.3 Minimal requirement for active power delivery at underfrequency: A generating plant shall be resilient to the reduction of frequency at the point of connection while reducing the maximum active power as little as possible. The admissible active power reduction due to underfrequency is limited by the full line in Figure 5 and is characterized by a maximum allowed reduction rate of 10 % of Pmax per 1 Hz for frequencies below 49,5 Hz. It is possible that a more stringent power reduction characteristic is required by the responsible party. Nevertheless this requirement is expected to be limited to an admissible active power reduction represented by the dotted line in Figure 5 which is characterised by a reduction rate of 2 % of the maximum power Pmax per 1 Hz for frequencies below 49 Hz. If any technologies intrinsic design or ambient conditions have influence on the power reduction behaviour of the system, the manufacturer shall specify at which ambient conditions the requirements can be fulfilled and eventual limitations. The information can be provided in the format of a graph showing the intrinsic behaviour of the generating unit for example at different ambient conditions. The power reduction and the ambient conditions shall comply with the specification given by the responsible party. If the generating unit does not meet the power reduction at the specified ambient conditions, the producer and the responsible party shall agree on acceptable ambient conditions.
4.4.4 Continuous operating voltage range: When generating power, the generating plant shall be capable of operating continuously when the voltage at the point of connection stays within the range of 85 % Un to 110 % Un. Beyond these values the under and over voltage ride through immunity limits as specified in clause 4.5.3 and 4.5.4 shall apply. In case of voltages below Un, it is allowed to reduce the apparent power to maintain the current limits of the generating plant. The reduction shall be as small as technically feasible. For this requirement all phase to phase voltages and in case a neutral is connected, additionally all phase to neutral voltages shall be evaluated. NOTE: The specified accepted reduction of output power is an absolute minimum requirement. Further power system aspects might require maintained output power in the entire continuous operation voltage range. The producer shall take into account the typical voltage rise and voltage drop within the generating plant.
4.5 Immunity to disturbances
4.5.1 General: In general, generating plants should contribute to overall power system stability by providing immunity towards dynamic voltage changes unless safety standards require a disconnection. The following clauses describe the required immunity for generating plants taking into account the connection technology of the generating modules. The following withstand capabilities shall be provided regardless of the settings of the interface protection. NOTE: An event on the HV and EHV transmission network can affect numerous small scale units on MV and LV level. Depending on the penetration of dispersed generation, a significant loss of active power provision can be caused. The described immunity requirements are independent of the interface protection settings. Disconnection settings of the interface protection relay always overrule technical capabilities. So, whether the generating plant will stay connected or not will also depend upon those settings.
4.5.2 Rate of change of frequency (ROCOF) immunity: ROCOF immunity of a power generating plant means that the generating modules in this plant stay connected with the distribution network and are able to operate when the frequency on the distribution network changes with a specified ROCOF. The generating units and all elements in the generating plant that might cause their disconnection or impact their behaviour shall have the same level of immunity. The generating modules in a generating plant shall have ROCOF immunity to ROCOF equal or exceeding the value specified by the responsible party. If no ROCOF immunity value is specified, at least 2 Hz/s shall apply. The ROCOF immunity is defined with a sliding measurement window of 500 ms. NOTE 1: For control action based on frequency measurement shorter measurement periods are expected to be necessary. NOTE 2: For small isolated distribution networks (typically on islands) higher ROCOF immunity values might be required.
4.5.3 Under-voltage ride through (UVRT)
4.5.3.1 General: Generating modules shall comply with the requirements of 4.5.3.2 and 4.5.3.3. Exempted from this requirement are small generating units below 50 kW of the following generation technologies: CHP, fuel cell, rotating machinery, hydro. NOTE 1: The power threshold of this exemption is expected to be reduced in future or the exception might be deleted completely especially once the installed capacity becomes relevant for the grid stability. The requirements apply to all kinds of faults (1ph, 2ph and 3ph). NOTE 2: A more distinctive differentiation for 1ph, 2ph and 3ph faults is under consideration. NOTE 3: The FRT curves in Figure 6, Figure 7 and Figure 8 describe the minimum requirements for continued connection of the generating plant to the grid. They are not designed for parameterising the interface protection.
4.5.3.2 Generating plant with non-synchronous generating technology: Generating modules shall be capable of remaining connected to the distribution network as long as the voltage at the point of connection remains above the voltage-time curve of Figure 6. The voltage is relative to Un. The smallest phase to neutral voltage, or if no neutral is present, the smallest phase to phase voltage shall be evaluated. The responsible party may define a different UVRT characteristic. Nevertheless, this requirement is expected to be limited to the most stringent curve as indicated in Figure 6. This means that the whole generating module has to comply with the UVRT requirement. This includes all elements in a generating plant: the generating units and all elements that might cause their disconnection. For the generating unit, this requirement is considered to be fulfilled if it stays connected to the distribution grid as long as the voltage at its terminals remains above the defined voltage-time diagram. After the voltage returns to continuous operating voltage range, 90 % of pre-fault power or available power whichever is the smallest shall be resumed as fast as possible, but at the latest within 1 s unless the DSO and the responsible party requires another value.
4.5.3.3 Generating plant with synchronous generating technology: Generating modules shall be capable of staying connected to the distribution network as long as the voltage at the point of connection remains above the voltage-time curve of Figure 7. The voltage is relative to Un. The smallest phase to neutral voltage or if no neutral is present the smallest phase to phase voltage shall be evaluated. The responsible party may define a different UVRT characteristic. Nevertheless, this requirement is expected to be limited to the most stringent curve, indicated in Figure 7. This means that the whole generating module has to comply with the UVRT requirement. This includes all elements in a generating plant: the generating units and all elements that might cause their disconnection. For the generating unit, this requirement is considered to be fulfilled if it stays connected to the distribution grid as long as the voltage at its terminals remains above the defined voltage-time diagram. After the voltage returns to continuous operating voltage range, 90 % of pre-fault power or available power whichever is the smallest shall be resumed as fast as possible, but at the latest within 3 s unless the DSO and the responsible party requires another value.
4.5.4 Over-voltage ride through (OVRT): Generating modules shall be capable of staying connected to the distribution network as long as the voltage at the point of connection remains below the voltage-time curve of Figure 8. The highest phase to neutral voltage or if no neutral is present the highest phase to phase voltage shall be evaluated. In case of pre-fault voltages below nominal voltage and a voltage step of more than 25 % Un disconnection is allowed. This means that not only the generating units shall comply with this OVRT requirement but also all elements in a generating plant that might cause its disconnection. Exempted from this requirement are small generating units below 50 kW of the following generation technologies: CHP, fuel cell, rotating machinery, hydro. NOTE 1: Exemption is acceptable for CHP, fuel cell, and generating units based on rotating machinery below 50 kW as EN 50465 for gas appliance requests disconnection in case of over voltage. NOTE 2: This is a minimum requirement. Further power system stability aspects might be relevant. The technical discussion is still ongoing. A voltage jump of +10 % of Uc from any stable point of operation is considered. In case of steady-state voltages near the maximum voltage before the event, this will result in an over voltage situation for many seconds. In later editions of this document, more stringent immunity might be required.
4.5.5 Phase jump immunity: Phase jump immunity of a power generating plant means that the generating modules in this plant stay connected with the distribution network and are able to operate during and after the occurrence of a phase jump. The generating units and all elements in the generating plant that might cause their disconnection or impact their behaviour shall have the same level of immunity. The generating modules in a generating plant shall have phase jump immunity equal to or exceeding 20° in case of a symmetrical phase jump. After the phase jump, 90 % of pre-fault power or available power whichever is the smallest shall be resumed as fast as possible, but at the latest within 3 s in case of synchronous generating technologies and within 1 s in case of non-synchronous generating technologies. NOTE 1: Asymmetrical phase jumps as present in case of phase to phase faults are included in the requirement of UVRT. NOTE 2: Generating units based on converter connected generation technology are typically immune to phase jumps up to 50°. NOTE 3: The 20° value is considered a state of the art immunity present for all generating technologies. System studies currently in preparation might result in the need for higher immunity levels for the next edition of this standard.
4.6 Active response to frequency deviation
4.6.1 Power response to overfrequency: Generating plants shall be capable of activating active power response to overfrequency at a programmable frequency threshold f1 at least between and including 50,2 Hz and 52 Hz with a programmable droop in a range of at least s=2 % to s=12 %. The droop reference is Pref. Unless defined differently by the responsible party: Pref=Pmax, in the case of synchronous generating technology and electrical energy storage systems. Pref=PM, the actual AC output power at the instant when the frequency reaches the threshold f1, in the case of all other non-synchronous generating technology. The power value calculated according to the droop is a maximum power limit. If e.g. the available primary power decreases during a high frequency period below the power defined by the droop function, lower power values are permitted. With ΔP=(1/s)·((f1-f)/fn)·Pref, where f is the actual frequency, the maximum power limit is: Pmax-limit=PM+ΔP. NOTE 1: In other documents power response to overfrequency can also be described as frequency control or Limited Frequency Sensitive Mode - Overfrequency (LFSM-O). NOTE 2: The active power droop relative to the reference power might also be defined as an active power gradient relative to the reference power. A droop in the range of 2 % to 12 % represents a gradient of 100 % to 16,7 % Pref /Hz so with g defined by g[P/Pref / Hz]=(1/(s·fn)) we get ΔP=g·Pref·(f1-f). The generating plant shall be capable of activating active power response to overfrequency as fast as technically feasible with an intrinsic dead time that shall be as short as possible with a maximum of 2 s. An intentional delay shall be programmable to adjust the dead time to a value between the intrinsic dead time and 2 s. The response time shall be as fast as technically feasible. EXAMPLE: - The following response times are considered technically feasible for specific generating technologies. - For PV and battery inverters below 1 s for ΔP of 100 % Pmax. - For wind turbines 2 s for ΔP<50 % Pmax. - For combustion engines, gas turbines, fuel cells below 2 MW 66 % /min for a 100 % change. - For combustion engines, gas turbines, fuel cells above 2 MW 20 % /min for a 100 % change. After activation, the active power frequency response shall use the actual frequency at any time, reacting to any frequency increase or decrease according to the programmed droop with an accuracy of ± 10 % of the nominal power (see Figure 9). The resolution of the frequency measurement shall be ± 10 mHz or less. The accuracy is evaluated with a 1 min average value. At POC, loads if present in the producer’s network might interfere with the response of the generating plant. The effect of loads is not considered for the evaluation of the accuracy, only the behaviour of the generating plant is relevant. NOTE 4: With the provision above, the intentional delay is only active for the activation of the function, once the function is operating, the established control loop is not intentionally delayed. NOTE 5: The option of an intentional delay is required since a very fast and undelayed active power frequency response in case of loss of mains would correct any excess of generation leading to a generation-consumption balance. In these circumstances, an unintended islanding situation with stable frequency would take place, in which the correct behaviour of any loss of mains detection based on frequency might be hindered. NOTE 6: The intentional delay is considered relevant for power system stability. For that reason, legal regulations might require a mutual agreement on the setting between DSO, responsible party and TSO. Generating plants reaching their minimum regulating level shall, in the event of further frequency increase, maintain this power level constant unless the DSO and the responsible party requires to disconnect the complete plant or if the plant consists of multiple units by disconnecting individual units. The active power frequency response is only deactivated if the frequency falls below the frequency threshold f1. If required by the DSO and the responsible party an additional deactivation threshold frequency fstop shall be programmable in the range of at least 50 Hz to f1. If fstop is configured to a frequency below f1 there shall be no response according to the droop in case of a frequency decrease (see Figure 10). The output power is kept constant until the frequency falls below fstop for a configurable time tstop. If at the time of deactivation of the active power frequency response the momentary active power PM is below the available active power PA, the active power increase of the generating plant shall not exceed the gradient defined in 4.10.2. Settings for the threshold frequency f1, the droop and the intentional delay are provided by the DSO and the responsible party. If no settings are provided, the default settings in Table 2 should be applied. NOTE 7: When applying active power response to overfrequency, the frequency threshold f1 should be set to a value from 50,2 Hz up to 50,5 Hz. Setting the frequency threshold f1 to 52 Hz is considered as deactivating this function.
Table 2 - Standard settings for frequency response to overfrequency
| Parameter | Range | Default setting |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Threshold frequency f1 | 50,2 Hz to 52 Hz | 50,2 Hz |
| Deactivation threshold fstop | 50,0 Hz to f1 | Deactivated |
| Deactivation time tstop | 0 to 600 s | 30s |
| Droop | 2 % to 12 % | 5 % |
| Intentional delay | 0 s to 2 s | 0 s |
The enabling and disabling of the function and its settings shall be field adjustable and means shall be provided to protect these from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO and the responsible party. NOTE 8: PV generating units are considered to have the ability to reduce power over the full droop range. NOTE 9: Protection setting overrules this behaviour. Alternatively for the droop function described above, the following procedure is allowed for generating modules if permitted by the DSO and the responsible party: the generating units shall disconnect at randomized frequencies, ideally uniformly distributed between the frequency threshold f1 and 52 Hz; NOTE 10: The usage of a disconnection limit above 51,5Hz does not necessarily imply the requirement to operate at this frequency. Operating range is defined in clause 4.4.4. If the randomized disconnection value is above the operating range and interface protection setting, the unit is disconnected according to chapter 4.9 at the value set by the interface protection. in case the frequency decreases again, the generating unit shall start its reconnection procedure once the frequency falls below the specific frequency that initiated the disconnection; for this procedure, the connection conditions described in 4.10 do not apply; the randomization shall either be at unit level by changing the threshold over time, or on plant level by choosing different values for each unit within a plant, or on distribution system level if the DSO specifies a specific threshold for each plant or unit connected to its distribution system. NOTE 11: This procedure could be applied for generating modules for which it is technically not feasible to reduce power with the required accuracy in the required time or for reasons within the distribution network for example to prevent unintentional island operation. NOTE 12: The behaviour will, for a part of the network with many such units, result in a similar droop as specified above for controllable generating units and hence will provide for the necessary power system stability. Due to its fast reaction capability it contributes significantly to the avoidance of a frequency overshoot. EES units upon reaching zero power output shall continue to follow the configured droop by switching into charging mode. EES units that are in charging mode shall increase the charging power according to the configured droop. In both cases, the minimum regulating level is considered as the maximum charging power taking the state of charge of the storage into account. In case the maximum charging capacity is reached or to prevent any other risk of injury or damage of equipment, a reduction of charging power is permitted. NOTE 13: In this context charging is regarded as a point of operation with negative active power output. If required by the DSO and the responsible party a mode shall be available where an EES upon reaching zero power will remain at zero power and will not switch into charging mode and an EES unit that is in charging mode shall keep the charging power constant. DC coupled storage integrated into the DC side of a generating unit are exempted from this requirement, if they are not capable of charging from AC. These exempted units upon reaching zero power shall remain at zero power and shall not switch into charging mode.
4.6.2 Power response to underfrequency: EES units shall be capable of activating active power response to underfrequency. Other generating units/plants should be capable of activating active power response to underfrequency. If active power to underfrequency is provided by a generating plant/unit, the function shall comply with the requirements below. NOTE 1: In other documents power response to underfrequency is also described as frequency control or Limited Frequency Sensitive Mode - Underfrequency (LFSM-U). Active power response to underfrequency shall be provided when all of the following conditions are met: when generating, the generating unit is operating at active power below its maximum active power Pmax; when generating, the generating unit is operating at active power below the available active power PA; NOTE 2: In case of EES units, the available power includes the state of charge of the storage. the voltages at the point of connection of the generating plant are within the continuous operating voltage range; and when generating, the generating unit is operating with currents lower than its current limit. NOTE 3: These conditions apply to each generating unit individually since the specified conditions need to be met by each generating unit individually to allow the unit to increase power. In the case of EES units, active power frequency response to underfrequency shall be provided in charging and generating mode. NOTE 4: In the case of EES units, the charging is regarded as a point of operation with negative active power. In charging mode the active power consumption is reduced according to the configured droop. Depending on the depth of the underfrequency event a change to generating mode will happen. In this case the state of charge of the storage is part of the conditions above. NOTE 5: This clause provides additional detail to the network code on emergency and restoration (Regulation (EU) 2017/2196) and more precisely on its Article 15 3 (a). The active power response to underfrequency shall be delivered at a programmable frequency threshold f1 at least between and including 49,8 Hz and 46,0 Hz with a programmable droop in a range of at least 2 % to 12 %. The droop reference Pref is Pmax. If the available primary power or a local set value increases during an underfrequency period above the power defined by the droop function, higher power values are permitted. The power value calculated according to the droop is therefore a minimum limit. The minimum power limit is, Pmin-limit=PM+ΔP, with ΔP=(1/s)×((f1-f)/fn)×Pref where f is the actual frequency. NOTE 6: In the case of active power response to underfrequency, Pmax is used as Pref to allow for system support even in case of low power output in the moment the event begins. NOTE 7: The active power droop relative to the reference power might also be defined as an active power gradient relative to the reference power. A droop in the range of 2 % to 12 % represents a gradient of 100 % to 16,7 % Pref /Hz so with g defined by g[P/Pref / Hz]=(1/(s·fn)) we get ΔP=g·Pref·(f1-f). NOTE 8: In the case of an increase of active power generation, the hierarchy of requirements in clause 4.1 apply. The generating unit shall be capable of activating active power response to underfrequency as fast as technically feasible with an intrinsic dead time that shall be as short as possible with a maximum of 2 s and with a step response time of maximum 30 s unless another value is defined by the relevant party. An intentional initial delay shall be programmable to adjust the dead time to a value between the intrinsic dead time and 2 s. After activation, the active power frequency response shall use the actual frequency at any time, reacting to any frequency increase or decrease according to the programmed droop with an accuracy of ± 10 % of the nominal power. The accuracy is evaluated with a 1 min average value. The resolution of the frequency measurement shall be ± 10 mHz or less. At POC loads, if present in the producer’s network, might interfere with the response of the generating plant. The effect of loads is not considered for the evaluation of the accuracy, only the behaviour of the generating plant is relevant. NOTE 9: With the provision above, the intentional delay is only active for the activation of the function, once the function is operating, the established control loop is not intentionally delayed. NOTE 10: The option of an intentional delay is required since a very fast and undelayed active power frequency response in case of loss of mains would correct any shortage of generation leading to a generation-consumption balance. In these circumstances, an unintended islanding situation with stable frequency would take place, in which the correct behaviour of any loss of mains detection based on frequency might be hindered. NOTE 11: The intentional delay is considered relevant for power system stability. For that reason, legal regulations might require a mutual agreement on the setting between DSO, responsible party and TSO. Generating modules reaching any of the conditions above during the provision of active power frequency response shall, in the event of further frequency decrease, maintain this power level constant. The active power frequency response is only deactivated if the frequency increases above the frequency threshold f1. Settings for the threshold frequency f1, the droop and the intentional delay are defined by the DSO and the responsible party, if no settings are provided, the function shall be disabled. NOTE 12: When applying active power response to underfrequency, the frequency threshold f1 should be set to a value from 49,8 Hz up to 49,5 Hz. Setting the frequency threshold f1 to 46 Hz is considered as deactivating this function. The activation and deactivation of the function and its settings shall be field adjustable and means shall be provided to protect these from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO and the responsible party.
4.7 Power response to voltage changes
4.7.1 General: When the contribution to voltage support is required by the DSO and the responsible party, the generating plant shall be designed to have the capability of managing reactive and/or active power generation according to the requirements of this clause.
4.7.2 Voltage support by reactive power
4.7.2.1 General: Generating plants shall not lead to voltage changes out of acceptable limits. These limits should be defined by national regulation. Generating units and plants shall be able to contribute to meet this requirement during normal network operation. Throughout the continuous operating frequency (see 4.4.2) and voltage (see 4.4.4) range, the generating plant shall be capable to deliver the requirements stipulated below. Outside these ranges, the generating plant shall follow the requirements as good as technically feasible although there is no specified accuracy required.
4.7.2.2 Capabilities: Figure 12 gives a graphical representation of the minimum and optional capabilities at nominal voltage. Unless specified differently below, for specific generating technologies, generating plants shall be able to operate with active factors as defined by the DSO and the responsible party from active factor=0,90 underexcited to active factor=0,90 overexcited. The reactive power capability shall be evaluated at the terminals of the/each generating unit. CHP generating units with a capacity ≤150 kVA shall be able to operate with active factors as defined by the DSO from cos φ=0,95 underexcited to cos φ=0,95 overexcited. Generating units with an induction generator coupled directly to the grid and used in generating plants above micro generating level, shall be able to operate with active factors as defined by the DSO from cos φ=0,95 underexcited to cos φ=1 at the terminals of the unit. Deviating from 4.7.2.3 only the cos φ set point mode is required. Deviating from the accuracy requirements below, the accuracy is only required at active power PD. Generating units with an induction generator coupled directly to the grid and used in micro generating plants shall operate with an active factor above 0,95 at the terminals of the generating unit. A controlled voltage support by reactive power is not required from this technology. Generating units with linear generators, coupled directly and synchronously to the grid shall operate with an active factor above 0,95 at the terminals of the generating unit, and therefore a controlled voltage support by reactive power is not required from this technology. In case of different generating technologies with different requirements in one generating plant, each unit shall provide voltage support by reactive power as required for its specific technology. A compensation of one technology to reach the general plant requirement is not expected. The DSO and the responsible party may relax the above requirements. This relaxation might be general or specific for a certain generating plant or generating technology. NOTE 1: The generating unit manufacturer has a certain freedom in the sizing of the output side of the generating unit in order to respond to the requirements of this document (e.g. due to voltage changes or reactive power exchange). This is indicated by the Design freedom area in Figure 12. On request, the manufacturer shall provide to all involved parties information documenting the actual choices regarding active power capabilities relative to reactive power requirements and related to the power rating in the operating voltage range (see further in this clause). A P-Q Diagram shall be included in the product documentation of a generating unit. NOTE 2: For additional network support an optional extended reactive power capability according to Figure 12 might be provided by the generating plant, if agreed on between the DSO and the producer and is generally required in some countries for some technologies by legal regulations. NOTE 3: Additional requirements (e.g. continuous Var compensation or continuous reactive power operation disregarding the availability of the primary energy) might be provided by the generating plant, if agreed between the DSO and the producer. NOTE 4: In case of overvoltage, additional reactive power might be exchanged up to the rated current (increasing the apparent power as a consequence), if agreed on between the DSO and the producer. When operating above the apparent power threshold Smin equal to 10 % of the maximum apparent power Smax or the minimum regulating level of the generating plant, whichever is the higher value, the reactive power capability shall be provided with an accuracy of ± 2 % Smax. Up to this apparent power threshold Smin, deviations above 2 % are permissible; nevertheless the accuracy shall always be as good as technically feasible and the exchange of uncontrolled reactive power in this low-power operation mode shall not exceed 10 % of the maximum apparent power Smax. At POC loads, if present in the producer’s network might interfere with the response of the generating plant. The effect of loads is not considered for the evaluation of the accuracy, only the behaviour of the generating plant is relevant. For generating units with a reactive power capability according Figure 12 the reactive power capability at active power PD shall be at least according Figure 13. For generating units with a reduced reactive power capability Figure 13 is only applicable up to the maximum reactive power capability. For voltages below Un it is allowed to reduce apparent power according to 4.4.4. NOTE 6: Whether there is a priority given to P or Q or the active factor when reaching the maximum apparent power this is not defined in this European Standard. Risks and benefits of different priority approaches are under consideration.
4.7.2.3 Control modes
4.7.2.3.1 General: Where required, the form of the contribution to voltage control shall be specified by the DSO. The control shall refer to the terminals of the generating units. The generating plant/unit shall be capable of operating in the control modes specified below within the limits specified in 4.7.2.2. The control modes are exclusive; only one mode may be active at a time. Q setpoint mode, Q (U), Cos φ setpoint mode, Cos φ (P). For mass market products, it is recommended to implement all control modes. In case of site specific generating plant design, only the control modes required by the DSO need to be implemented. The configuration, activation and deactivation of the control modes shall be field adjustable. For field adjustable configurations and activation of the active control mode, means shall be provided to protect the settings from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO. Which control modes are available in a product and how they are configured shall be stated in the product documentation.
4.7.2.3.2 Setpoint control modes: Q setpoint mode and cos φ setpoint mode control the reactive power output and the cos φ of the output respectively, according to a set point set in the control of the generating plant/unit. In the case of change of the set point local or by remote control the settling time for the new set point shall be less than one minute.
4.7.2.3.3 Voltage related control mode: The voltage related control mode Q (U) controls the reactive power output as a function of the voltage. There is no preferred state of the art for evaluating the voltage. Therefore it is the responsibility of the generating plant designer to choose a method. One of the following methods should be used: • the positive sequence component of the fundamental; • the average of the voltages measured independently for each phase to neutral or phase to phase; phase independently the voltage of every phase to determine the reactive power for every phase. For voltage related control modes, a characteristic with a minimum and maximum value and three connected lines according to Figure 16 shall be configurable. In addition to the characteristic, further parameters shall be configurable: The dynamics of the control shall correspond with a first order filter having a time constant that is configurable in the range of 3 s to 60 s. NOTE 1: The time to perform 95 % of the changed set point due to a change in voltage will be 3 times the time constant. NOTE 2: The dynamic response of the generating units to voltage changes is not considered here. The response to disturbances as in 4.5 and short circuit current requirements as in 4.7.4 is not included in this clause. NOTE 3: An intentional delay is under consideration. To limit the reactive power at low active power two methods shall be configurable: a minimal cos φ shall be configurable in the range of 0-0,95; two active power levels shall be configurable both at least in the range of 0 % to 100 % of PD. The lock-in value turns the Q(U) mode on, the lock-out value turns Q(U) off. If lock-in is larger than lock-out a hysteresis is given. See also Figure 14. The static accuracy shall be in accordance with 4.7.2.2. The dynamic accuracy shall be in accordance with Figure 15 with a maximum tolerance of +/- 5% of PD plus a time delay of up to 3 seconds deviating from an ideal first order filter response.
4.7.2.3.4 Power related control mode: The power related control mode cos (P) controls the cos φ of the output as a function of the active power output. For power related control modes, a characteristic with a minimum and maximum value and three connected lines shall be configurable in accordance with Figure 16. Resulting from a change in active power output a new cos φ set point is defined according to the set characteristic. The response to a new cos φ set value shall be as fast as technically feasible to allow the change in reactive power to be in synchrony with the change in active power. The new reactive power set value shall be reached at the latest within 10 s after the end value of the active power is reached. The static accuracy of each cos φ set point shall be according to 4.7.2.2.
4.7.3 Voltage related active power reduction: In order to avoid disconnection due to overvoltage protection (see 4.9.2.3 and 4.9.2.4), generating plants/units are allowed to reduce active power output as a function of this rising voltage. The final implemented logic can be chosen by the manufacturer. Nevertheless, this logic shall not cause steps or oscillations in the output power. The power reduction caused by such a function shall not be faster than the equivalent of a first order filter with a time constant tau=3 s. The enabling and disabling of the function shall be field adjustable and means have to be provided to protect the setting from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO.
4.7.4 Short circuit current requirements on generating plants
4.7.4.1 General: The following clauses describe the required short circuit current contribution for generating plants taking into account the connection technology of the generating modules. Generating modules classified as type B modules according to COMMISSION REGULATION 2016/631 shall comply with the requirements of 4.7.4.2 and 4.7.4.3. Generating modules classified as type A according to COMMISSION REGULATION 2016/631 should comply with these requirements. The actual behaviour of type A modules shall be specified in the connection agreement. NOTE: Based on the chosen banding threshold it is considered necessary to include generating modules classified as type A if connected to medium voltage distribution grids. Exemption is only acceptable for CHP and generating units based on rotating machinery below 50 kW as EN 50465 for gas appliance requests disconnection in case of under voltage.
4.7.4.2 Generating plant with non-synchronous generating technology
4.7.4.2.1 Voltage support during faults and voltage steps: In general no voltage support during faults and voltage steps is required from generating plants connected in LV distribution networks as the additional reactive current is expected to interfere with grid protection equipment. If the responsible party requires voltage support during faults and voltage steps for generating plants of type B connected to LV distribution grids, the clause 4.7.4 of EN 50549-2 applies.
4.7.4.2.2 Zero current mode for converter connected generating technology: If UVRT capability (see 4.5.3) is provided additional to the requirements of 4.5, generating units connected to the grid by a converter shall have the capability to reduce their current as fast as technically feasible down to or below 10 % of the rated current when the voltage is outside of a static voltage range. Generating units based on a doubly fed induction machine can only reduce the positive sequence current below 10 % of the rated current. Negative sequence current shall be tolerated during unbalanced faults. In case this current reduction is not sufficient, the DSO should choose suitable interface protection settings. The static voltage range shall be adjustable from 20 % to 100 % of Un for the undervoltage boundary and from 100 % to 130 % of Un for the overvoltage boundary. The default setting shall be 50% of Un for the undervoltage boundary and 120% of Un for the overvoltage boundary. Each phase to neutral voltage or if no neutral is present each phase to phase voltage shall be evaluated. At voltage re-entry into the voltage range, 90% of pre-fault power or available power, whichever is the smallest, shall be resumed as fast as possible, but at the latest according to 4.5.3 and 4.5.4. All described settings are defined by the DSO and the responsible party. If no settings are provided, the function shall be disabled. The enabling and disabling and the settings shall be field adjustable and means have to be provided to protect these from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO.
4.7.4.2.3 Induction generator based units: In general no voltage support during faults and voltage steps is required from generating plants connected in LV distribution networks as the additional reactive current is expected to interfere with grid protection equipment. If the responsible party requires voltage support during faults and voltage steps for generating plants of type B connected to LV distribution grids, the clause 4.7.4 of EN50549-2 applies.
4.7.4.3 Generating plant with synchronous generating technology - Synchronous generator based units: In general no voltage support during faults and voltage steps is required from generating plants connected in LV distribution networks as the additional reactive current is expected to interfere with grid protection equipment. If the responsible party requires voltage support during faults and voltage steps for generating plants of type B connected to LV distribution grids, the clause 4.7.4 of EN50549-2 applies.
4.8 EMC and power quality: Similar to any other apparatus or fixed installation, generating units shall comply with the requirements on electromagnetic compatibility established in Directive 2014/30/EU or 2014/53/EU, whichever applies. EMC limits and tests, described in EN 61000 series, have been traditionally developed for loads, without taking into account the particularities of generating units, such as their capability to create overvoltages or high frequency disturbances due to the presence of power converters, which were either impossible or less frequent in case of loads. NOTE 1: Currently, IEC SC 77A are reviewing all their existing standards to include, where necessary, specific requirements for generating units/plants. For dispersed generating units in LV networks, the Technical Report IEC/TR 61000–3-15 is addressing gaps in the existing EMC standards making recommendations on the following aspects: Harmonic emissions; Flicker and voltage fluctuations; DC injection; Short and long duration overvoltages emission; Switching frequency emission; Immunity to voltage dips and short interruptions; Immunity to frequency variation; Immunity to harmonics and inter-harmonics; Unbalance. As long as specific tests for generating units are not available for immunity and/or emission, generic EMC standards and/or any relevant EU harmonized EMC standard should be applied. NOTE 2: Besides the compliance with EN61000 Series, in most countries power quality characteristic according to standards such as for example EN 61400–21 or VDE V 0124–100 are required as part of the connection agreement. Additional phenomena need to be addressed specifically to generating plants and their integration in the power system. ROCOF: See 4.5.2; UVRT: See 4.5.3; OVRT: See 4.5.4; DC injection: Generating plants shall not inject direct currents. NOTE 3: The DC injection clause is considered to be passed when for all generating units within the generating plant the measured DC injection of a type-tested unit is below the testing threshold. Generating plants can also disturb mains signalling (ripple control or power line carrier systems). EMC requirements on inter-harmonics and on conducted disturbances in the frequency range between 2 kHz and 150 kHz are under development. In case of electromagnetic interferences to mains signalling systems due to the connection of a generating plant, mitigation measures should be taken and national requirements may apply. Generating units are also expected to be compatible with voltage characteristics at the point of connection, as described in EN 50160 or in national regulations; however no compliance test is required due to the scope of EN 50160.
4.9 Interface protection
4.9.1 General: According to HD 60364-5-551:2010, 551.7.4, means of automatic switching shall be provided to disconnect the generating plant from the distribution network in the event of loss of that supply or deviation of the voltage or frequency at the supply terminals from values declared for normal supply. This automatic means of disconnection has following main objectives: prevent the power production of the generating plant to cause an overvoltage situation in the distribution network it is connected to. Such overvoltages could result in damages to the equipment connected to the distribution network as well as the distribution network itself; detect unintentional island situations and disconnect the generating plant in this case. This is contributing to prevent damage to other equipment, both in the producers’ installations and the distribution network due to out of phase re-closing and to allow for maintenance work after an intentional disconnection of a section of the distribution network; NOTE 1: It is pointed out that checking the absence of voltage on all the live conductors is anyway mandatory before accessing a site for (maintenance) work. assist in bringing the distribution network to a controlled state in case of voltage or frequency deviations beyond corresponding regulation values. It is not the purpose of the interface protection system to: disconnect the generating plant from the distribution network in case of faults internal to the power generating plant. Protection against internal faults (short-circuits) shall be coordinated with network protection, according to DSO protection criteria. Protection against e.g. overload, electric shock and against fire hazards shall be implemented additionally according to HD 60364-1 and local requirements; prevent damages to the generating unit due to incidents (e.g. short circuits) on the distribution network. Interface protections may contribute to preventing damage to the generating units due to out-of-phase reclosing of automatic reclosing which may happen after some hundreds of ms. However, in some countries some technologies of generating units are explicitly required to have an appropriate immunity level against the consequences of out-of-phase reclosing. The type of protection and the sensitivity and operating times depend upon the protection and the characteristics of the distribution network. A wide variety of approaches to achieve the above mentioned objectives is used throughout Europe. Besides the passive observation of voltage and frequency other active and passive methods are available and used to detect island situations. The requirements given in this clause are intended to provide the necessary functions for all known approaches as well as to give guidance in their use. Which functions are available in a product shall be stated in the product documentation. The interface protection system shall comply with the requirements of this European Standard, the available functions and configured settings shall comply with the requirements of the DSO and the responsible party. In any case, the settings defined shall be understood as the values for the interface protection system, i.e. where there is a wider technical capability of the generation module, it shall not be withheld by the settings of the protections (other than the interface protection). For micro generating plants, the interface protection system and the point of measurement might be integrated into the generating units. For generating plants with nominal current above 16 A the DSO may define a threshold above which the interface protection system shall be realized as a dedicated device and not integrated into the generating units. NOTE 2: Example thresholds are 11,08 kW per generating plant (Italy), 30 kVA per generating plant (Germany, Austria) and 50 kW per generating unit (GB). NOTE 3: Integrated interface protection systems might not be possible for two different reasons: to place the protection system as close to the point of connection as possible, to avoid tripping due to overvoltages resulting from the voltage rise within the producer’s network; to allow for periodic field tests. In some countries periodic field tests are not required if the protection system meets the requirements of single fault safety. The interface protection relay acts on the interface switch. The DSO may require that the interface protection relay acts additionally on another switch with a proper delay in case the interface switch fails to operate. In case of failure of the power supply of the interface protection, the interface protection shall trigger the interface switch without delay. An uninterruptible power supply may be required by the DSO, for instance in case of UVRT capability, delay in protection etc. In case of field adjustable settings of threshold and operation time, means shall be provided to protect the settings from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO.
4.9.2 Void
4.9.3 Requirements on voltage and frequency protection
4.9.3.1 General: Part or all of the following described functions may be required by the DSO and the responsible party. NOTE 1: In the following the headings of the clause sections contain ANSI device numbers according to IEEE/ANSI C37.2 in square brackets e.g. [27]. The protection functions shall evaluate at least all phases where generating units, covered by this protection system, are connected to. In case of three phase generating units/plants and in all cases when the protection system is implemented as an external protection system in a three phase power supply system, all phase to phase voltages and, if a neutral conductor is present, all phase to neutral voltages shall be evaluated. NOTE 2: It is possible to calculate the phase to phase voltages based on phase-neutral measurements. The frequency shall be evaluated on at least one of the voltages. If multiple signals (e.g. 3 phase to phase voltages) are to be evaluated by one protection function, this function shall evaluate all of the signals separately. The output of each evaluation shall be OR connected, so that if one signal passes the threshold of a function, the function shall trip the protection in the specified time. The minimum required accuracy for protection is: • for frequency measurement ± 0,05 Hz; • for voltage measurement ± 1 % of Un; The reset time shall be ≤50 ms. The interface protection relay shall not conduct continuous starting and disengaging operations of the interface protection relay. Therefore a reasonable reset ratio shall be implemented which shall not be zero but be below 2% of nominal value for voltage and below 0,2Hz for frequency. NOTE 3: If the interface protection system is external to the generating unit, it is preferably located as close as possible to the point of connection. The voltage rise between the point of connection and the measurement input of the interface protection system is then kept as small as possible to avoid nuisance tripping of the overvoltage protection.
4.9.3.2 Undervoltage protection [27]: The evaluation of the r.m.s. or the fundamental value is allowed. Undervoltage protection may be implemented with two completely independent protection thresholds, each one able to be activated or not. The standard adjustment ranges are as follows. Undervoltage threshold stage 1 [27 < ]: • Threshold (0,2 – 1) Un adjustable by steps of 0,01 Un; • Operate time (0,1 – 100) s adjustable in steps of 0,1 s. Undervoltage threshold stage 2 [27<<]: Threshold (0,2 – 1) Un adjustable by steps of 0,01 Un; Operate time (0,1 – 5) s adjustable in steps of 0,05 s. The undervoltage threshold stage 2 is not applicable for micro-generating plants.
4.9.3.3 Overvoltage protection [59]: The evaluation of the r.m.s. or the fundamental value is allowed. Overvoltage protection may be implemented with two completely independent protection thresholds, each one able to be activated or not. The standard adjustment ranges are as follows. Overvoltage threshold stage 1 [59 > ]: Threshold (1,0 – 1,2) Un adjustable by steps of 0,01 Un; Operate time (0,1 – 100) s adjustable in steps of 0,1 s. Overvoltage threshold stage 2 [59>>]: • Threshold (1,0 – 1,30) Un adjustable by steps of 0,01 Un; • Operate time (0,1 – 5) s adjustable in steps of 0,05 s.
4.9.3.4 Overvoltage 10 min mean protection: The calculation of the 10 min value shall comply with the 10 min aggregation of EN 61000-4-30 Class S, but deviating from EN 61000-4-30 as a moving window is used. Therefore the function shall be based on the calculation of the square root of the arithmetic mean of the squared input values over 10 min. The calculation of a new 10 min value at least every 3 s is sufficient, which is then to be compared with the threshold value. Threshold (1,0 – 1,15) Un adjustable by steps of 0,01 Un; • Start time ≤ 3s not adjustable; Time delay setting=0 ms. NOTE 1: This function evaluates the r.m.s value. NOTE 2: More information can be found in EN 50160.
4.9.3.5 Underfrequency protection [81 < ]: Underfrequency protection may be implemented with two completely independent protection thresholds, each one able to be activated or not. The standard adjustment ranges are as follows. Underfrequency threshold stage 1 [81 < ]: • Threshold (47,0 – 50,0) Hz adjustment by steps of 0,1 Hz; Operate time (0,1 – 100) s adjustable in steps of 0,1 s. Underfrequency threshold stage 2 [81<<]: • Threshold (47,0 – 50,0) Hz adjustment by steps of 0,1 Hz; • Operate time (0,1 – 5) s adjustable in steps of 0,05 s. In order to use narrow frequency thresholds for islanding detection (see 4.9.3.3) it may be required to have the ability to activate and deactivate a stage by an external signal. The frequency protection shall function correctly in the input voltage range between 20 % Un and 120 % Un and shall be inhibited for input voltages of less than 20 % Un. Under 0,2 Un the frequency protection is inhibited. Disconnection may only happen based on undervoltage protection.
4.9.3.6 Overfrequency protection [81 > ]: Overfrequency protection may be implemented with two completely independent protection thresholds, each one able to be activated or not. The standard adjustment ranges are as follows. Overfrequency threshold stage 1 [81 > ]: • Threshold (50,0 - 52,0) Hz adjustment by steps of 0,1 Hz; Operate time (0,1 – 100) s adjustable in steps of 0,1 s. Overfrequency threshold stage 2 [81 >> ]: Threshold (50,0 - 52,0) Hz adjustment by steps of 0,1 Hz; Operate time (0,1 - 5) s adjustable in steps of 0,05 s. In order to use narrow frequency thresholds for islanding detection (see4.9.3.3) it may be required to have the ability to activate and deactivate a stage by an external signal. The frequency protection shall function correctly in the input voltage range between 20 % Un and 120 % Un and shall be inhibited for input voltages of less than 20 % Un.
4.9.4 Means to detect island situation
4.9.4.1 General: Besides the passive observation of voltage and frequency further means to detect an island may be required by the DSO. Detecting islanding situations shall not be contradictory to the immunity requirements of 4.5. Commonly used functions include: • Active methods tested with a resonant circuit; • ROCOF tripping; • Switch to narrow frequency band; • Vector shift; • Transfer trip. Only some of the methods above rely on standards. Namely for ROCOF tripping and for the detection of a vector shift, also called a vector jump, currently no European Standard is available.
4.9.4.2 Active methods tested with a resonant circuit: These are methods which pass the resonant circuit test for PV inverters according to EN 62116.
4.9.4.3 Switch to narrow frequency band (see Annex E and Annex F): In case of local phenomena (e.g. a fault or the opening of circuit breaker along the line) the DSO in coordination with the responsible party may require a switch to a narrow frequency band to increase the interface protection relay sensitivity. In the event of a local fault it is possible to enable activation of the restrictive frequency window (using the two underfrequency/overfrequency thresholds described in 4.9.2.5 and 4.9.2.6) correlating its activation with another additional protection function. If required by the DSO, a digital input according to 4.9.4 shall be available to allow the DSO the activation of a restrictive frequency window by communication. NOTE: An additional gateway to ensure communication with the DSO communication system might be required.
4.9.5 Digital input to the interface protection: If required by the DSO, the interface protection shall have at least two configurable digital inputs. These inputs can for example be used to allow transfer trip or the switching to the narrow frequency band.
4.10 Connection and starting to generate electrical power
4.10.1 General: Connection and starting to generate electrical power is only allowed after voltage and frequency are within the allowed voltage and frequency ranges for at least the specified observation time. It shall not be possible to overrule these conditions. Within these voltage and frequency ranges, the generating plant shall be capable of connecting and starting to generate electrical power. The setting of the conditions depends on whether the connection is due to a normal operational startup or an automatic reconnection after tripping of the interface protection. In case the settings for automatic reconnection after tripping and starting to generate power are not distinct in a generating plant, the tighter range and the start-up gradient shall be used. The frequency range, the voltage range, the observation time and the power gradient shall be field adjustable. For field adjustable settings, means shall be provided to protect the settings from unpermitted interference (e.g. password or seal) if required by the DSO.
4.10.2 Automatic reconnection after tripping: The frequency range, the voltage range, the observation time shall be adjustable in the range according to Table 3 column 2. If no settings are specified by the DSO and the responsible party, the default settings for the reconnection after tripping of the interface protection are according to Table 3 column 3.
Table 3 - Automatic reconnection after tripping
| Parameter | Range | Default setting |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Lower frequency | 47,0Hz – 50,0Hz | 49,5Hz |
| Upper frequency | 50,0Hz – 52,0Hz | 50,2Hz |
| Lower voltage | 50% – 100% Un | 85 % Un |
| Upper voltage | 100% – 120% Un | 110 % Un |
| Observation time | 10s – 600s | 60s |
| Active power increase gradient | 6% – 3000%/min | 10%/min |
After reconnection, the active power generated by the generating plant shall not exceed a specified gradient expressed as a percentage of the active nominal power of the unit per minute. If no gradient is specified by the DSO and the responsible party, the default setting is 10 % Pn/min. Generating modules for which it is technically not feasible to increase the power respecting the specified gradient over the full power range may connect after 1 min to 10 min (randomized value, uniformly distributed) or later.
4.10.3 Starting to generate electrical power: The frequency range, the voltage range, the observation time shall be adjustable in the range according to Table 4 column 2. If no settings are specified by the DSO and the responsible party, the default settings for connection or starting to generate electrical power due to normal operational startup or activity are according to Table 4 column 3.
Table 4 - Starting to generate electrical power
| Parameter | Range | Default setting |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Lower frequency | 47,0Hz – 50,0Hz | 49,5Hz |
| Upper frequency | 50,0Hz – 52,0Hz | 50,1Hz |
| Lower voltage | 50% – 100% Un | 85 % Un |
| Upper voltage | 100% – 120% Un | 110 % Un |
| Observation time | 10s – 600s | 60s |
| Active power increase gradient | 6% – 3000%/min | disabled |
If applicable, the power gradient shall not exceed the maximum gradient specified by the DSO and the responsible party. Heat driven CHP generating units do not need to keep a maximum gradient, since the start up is randomized by the nature of the heat demand. For manual operations performed on site (e.g. for the purpose of initial start-up or maintenance) it is permitted to deviate from the observation time and ramp rate.
4.10.4 Synchronization: Synchronizing a generating plant/unit with the distribution network shall be fully automatic i.e. it shall not be possible to manually close the switch between the two systems to carry out synchronization.
4.11 Ceasing and reduction of active power on set point
4.11.1 Ceasing active power: Generating plants with a maximum capacity of 0,8 kW or more shall be equipped with a logic interface (input port) in order to cease active power output within five seconds following an instruction being received at the input port. If required by the DSO and the responsible party, this includes remote operation.
4.11.2 Reduction of active power on set point: Generating plants with a maximum capacity of 0,8 kW or more shall be capable of reducing their active power to a limit value provided remotely by the DSO. The limit value shall be adjustable in the complete operating range from the maximum active power to minimum regulating level. The adjustment of the limit value shall be possible with a maximum increment of 10 % of nominal power. A generation unit/plant shall be capable of carrying out the power output reduction to the respective limit within an envelope of not faster than 0,66 % Pn/ s and not slower than 0,33 % Pn/ s with an accuracy of 5 % of nominal power. Generating plants are permitted to disconnect from the network at a limit value below their minimum regulating level. If required by the DSO, this includes remote operation. NOTE 1: Besides the requirements of this subclause there might be other systems in place to control active power for reasons of market participation or local optimization. Exempted from this requirement are small generating units below 50 kW of the following generation technologies: CHP, fuel cell, rotating machinery, hydro. NOTE 2: The power threshold of this exemption is expected to be reduced in future or the exception might be deleted completely especially once the installed capacity becomes relevant for the grid stability.
4.12 Remote information exchange: Generating plants whose power is above a threshold to be determined by the DSO and the responsible party shall have the capacity to be monitored by the DSO or TSO control centre or control centres as well as receive operation parameter settings for the functions specified in this European Standard from the DSO or TSO control centre or control centres. This information exchange is aimed at allowing the DSO and/or the TSO to improve, optimize and make safer the operation of their respective networks. The remote monitoring and operation parameter settings system that may be used by the DSO is not aimed at replacing the manual and automatic control means implemented by the generating plant operator to control the operation of the generating plant. It should not interact directly with the power generation equipment and the switching devices of the generating plant. It should interact with the operation and control system of the generating plant. In principle, standardized communication should be used. It is recommended that in case of using protocols for signal transmission used between the DSO or TSO control centre or control centres and the generating plant, relevant technical standards (e.g. EN 60870-5-101, EN 60870-5-104, EN 61850 and in particular EN 61850-7-4, EN 61850-7-420, IEC/TR 61850-90-7, as well as EN 61400-25 for wind turbines and relevant parts of IEC 62351 for relevant security measures) are recognized. Alternative protocols can be agreed between the DSO and the producer. These protocols include hardwired digital input/output and analogue input/output provided locally by DSO. The information needed for remote monitoring and the setting of configurable parameters are specific to each distribution network and to the way it is operated. Signal transmission times between the DSO and/or the TSO control centre and the generating plant will depend on the means of transmission used between the DSO and/or TSO control centre and the generating plant. Informative Annex B of EN50549-2 can be used as guidance regarding the monitoring information and the remote operation parameter setting.
4.13 Requirements regarding single fault tolerance of interface protection system and interface switch: If required in 4.3.2, the interface protection system and the interface switch shall meet the requirements of single fault tolerance. A single fault shall not lead to a loss of the safety functions. Faults of common cause shall be taken into account if the probability for the occurrence of such a fault is significant. Whenever reasonably practical, the individual fault shall be displayed and lead to the disconnection of the power generating unit or system. NOTE: This requirement for the detection of individual faults does not mean that all faults are detected. Accumulation of undetected faults can therefore lead to an unintentional output signal and result in a hazardous condition. Series-connected switches shall each have a independent breaking capacity corresponding to the rated current of the generating unit and corresponding to the short circuit contribution of the generating unit. The short-time withstand current of the switching devices shall be coordinated with maximum short circuit power at the connection point. At least one of the switches shall be a switch-disconnector suitable for overvoltage category 2. For single-phase generating units, the switch shall have one contact of this overvoltage category for both the neutral conductor and the line conductor. For poly-phase generating units, it is required to have one contact of this overvoltage category for all active conductors. The second switch may be formed of electronic switching components from an inverter bridge or another circuit provided that the electronic switching components can be switched off by control signals and that it is ensured that a failure is detected and leads to prevention of the operation at the latest at the next reconnection. For PV-inverters without simple separation between the network and the PV generating unit (e.g. PV-Inverter without transformer) both switches mentioned in the paragraph above shall be switch-disconnectors with the requirements described therein, although one switching device is permitted to be located between PV array and PV inverter.